# Knapsack problem


## Introduction

The knapsack problem or rucksack problem is a problem in combinatorial
optimization. Given a set of items, each with a weight and a value,
determine the number of each item to include in a collection so that the
total weight is less than or equal to a given limit and the total value
is as large as possible. It derives its name from the problem faced by
someone who is constrained by a fixed-size knapsack and must fill it
with the most valuable items.

![Wikipedia](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/f/fd/Knapsack.svg)

### Definitions

The most common problem is the 0-1 knapsack problem, which restricts the
number $x_{i}$ of copies of each kind of item to zero or one. Given a
set of $n$ items numbered from $1$ up to $n$, each with a weigh $w_{i}$
and a value $v_{i}$, along with a maximum weight capacity $W$,

$$
\begin{split}
& \max\sum_{i=1}^n v_ix_i\\
\text{s.t. } & \sum_{i=1}^n w_ix_i\le W,\;x_i \in {0,1}\\
\end{split}
$$

The decision problem form of the knapsack problem (Can a value of at
least V be achieved without exceeding the weight W?) is NP-complete,
thus there is no known algorithm both correct and fast (polynomial-time)
in all cases.

## Approaches

### Exact solutions

#### Full search

As for other discrete tasks, the backpack problem can be solved by
completely sorting through all possible solutions. Suppose there are $n$
items that can be packed in a backpack. It is necessary to determine the
maximum value of the cargo, whose weight does not exceed $W$. For each
item, there are 2 options: the item is either put in a backpack or not.
Then enumeration of all possible options has time complexity $O(2^n)$,
which allows it to be used only for a small number of objects. With an
increase in the number of objects, the task becomes unsolvable by this
method in an acceptable time.

#### Dynamic programming algorithm

A similar dynamic programming solution for the 0/1 knapsack problem also
runs in pseudo-polynomial time. Assume
$w_{1},\,w_{2},\,\ldots ,\,w_{n}, W$ are strictly positive integers.
Define $m(i,w)$ to be the maximum value that can be attained with weight
less than or equal to $w$ using items up to $i$ (first $i$ items). We
can define $m(i,w)$ recursively as follows:

$$
m(i, w) = 
 \begin{cases}
   m(0,w)=0  \\
   m(i,w)=m(i-1,w) &\text{$w_{i}>w$ } \\
   m(i,w)=max(m(i-1,w), m(i-1,w-w_{i})+w_{i}) &\text{$w_{i} \le w$ }
 \end{cases}
$$

The solution can then be found by calculating $m(n,W)$. To do this
efficiently, we can use a table to store previous computations. This
solution will therefore run in $O(nW)$ time and $O(nW)$ space.

### Approximation algorithms

#### Greedy algorithm

To solve the problem by the greedy algorithm, it is necessary to sort
things by their specific value (that is, the ratio of the value of an
item to its weight), and put items with the highest specific value in a
backpack. The running time of this algorithm is the sum of the sorting
time and stacking time. The difficulty in sorting items is
$O(N \ log (N))$. Next, the calculation of how many items fit in a
backpack for the total time $O(N)$. Total complexity $O(N \ log (N))$ if
necessary sorting and $O(N)$ if already sorted data. It should be
understood that a greedy algorithm can lead to an answer arbitrarily far
from optimal. For example, if one item has a weight of 1 and a cost of
2, and another has a weight of $W$ and a cost of $W$, then the greedy
algorithm will pick up the final cost of 2 with the optimal answer $W$.

#### Probabilistic algorithm

It is a modification of greedy algorithm. In this algorithm decision to
include an item with index $j$ in the knapsack is taken based on th
probability of $\frac{\lambda_j}{\sum_{i=1}^n\lambda_i}$, where
$\lambda_i$ is the ratio of the value of an item to its weight. This
algorithm is run several times and the best solution is selected. If
Algorithm starts as many times as you like, then the probability of
getting it as a result the work of the optimal solution tends to 1.
Total complexity is equal to $O(mN  log(N))$ operations. **Calculating
experiment** The above algorithms were implemented in the python
programming language, their source codes are available at the link
below. Initial data for the task, namely the values ($v_{i}$) and
weights ($w_{i}$) of items were randomly generated. The following ranges
of values have been selected $v_{i}\in [0, 100]$ and
$w_{i}\in [100, 200]$. Maximum weight capacity $W$ generated randomly
from interval $W \in [0.5\sum w_i, 0.75\sum w_i]$.

## Results

Dynamic programming algorithm vs probabilistic algorithm:

![knapsack_problem_1](./knapsack_problem_1.svg)

![knapsack_problem_2](./knapsack_problem_2.svg)

Probabilistic algorithm in case when number of items is fixed (150
items):

![knapsack_problem_3](./knapsack_problem_3.svg)

## Code

[Open In
Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/github/MerkulovDaniil/optim/blob/master/assets/Notebooks/Knapsack_problem.ipynb){:
.btn }

## References

- [Scheduling
  theory](http://physcontrol.phys.msu.ru/materials/PosobieLazarev/TeorRasp.pdf)
- [Wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Knapsack_problem)
